An accident. It was early evening and we were back at the village house that had been kindly
loaned to us by the architect. I'd taken something upstairs, washing I think, to rinse
on the terrace and hang out. Coming back down the stone staircase, I guessed with bare feet,
I found myself losing my footing. I arrived at the foot of the stairs on my back. The
next thing I heard was, can you hear me? And being shaken. Opening my eyes is like a scene
from a comic. As I moved my head around I was seeing stars and my right leg and bum
hurt like hell. I'd been unconscious for no more than 20 or 30 seconds but this seemed
like a lifetime to Stephanie who was now reluctant to try and haul me to my feet or at least
to my knees. With instructions not to move she ran round the corner to her neighbour's
house. I wasn't sure I could. She soon arrived back with Matt, her neighbour and his mum
and I was slowly raised to a seating position but I was still seeing stars. Cautiously I
answered questions. Did I feel sick? Could I focus my eyes? Could I rotate my head? Move
my leg? Wiggle my toes? All seemed well but a large bump was rising on my head and the
stars at last went away. Nothing seemed to be broken and the offer of a trip to hospital
in the port was declined. An early night, a long sleep and a review of the position
next morning was the plan. After a restless night that was mostly caused by my aching
leg we decided a hospital visit would be a sensible precaution. My leg was more painful
than my head with the bump having shrunk away. I hobbled into the general hospital reception
where we were directed to a general waiting area. After a short time we realised there
was an appointment system in operation and fearing we could be there for several hours
waiting our turn I suggested ringing Manos for advice. We adjourned to a cafe opposite
and made the call. His concern was immediate. Drive Jeff over here straight away I will
call my doctor and get him to see you as soon as possible. It sounded a good offer and within
the hour after a nice frappe at the office we were in the doctor's waiting room. After
a short wait we were called in. Hello I'm George and Manos has told me about the incident.
Where is the pain at the moment? Dr George carried out a thorough series of tests and
conducted a detailed cross examination with questions about the fall as well as my general
health. He even put out his cigarette in the ashtray on his desk and resisted lighting
another. Eventually we both sat down and he offered his advice. There appeared not to
be any serious repercussions from the fall. His tests had not revealed any signs of neurological
effects. He outlined the sort of things I should watch for including nausea, balance
problems, eyesight changes etc. He recommended visiting my doctor back in England in a week's
time. Reassured I asked if there were any changes I should make. He suggested I should
avoid strenuous exercise, I do anyway, and should avoid excessive drinking but as I was
on holiday and it was hot social drinking was okay. By this he elaborated he meant a
glass or two of wine with my evening meal should be okay. As an after thought he added
that social smoking should be okay as well as the flight home next week. If I had any
concerns I should call him again. We returned back to the office feeling relieved and relayed
the information to Manos. We laughed about the social drinking and smoking and Manos
immediately offered me one of his high strength cigarettes. I readily refused. As an alternative
he suggested lunch. His treat had to have guilt about the stairs despite me reassuring
him it was only my own fault that the fall had taken place. A welcome long lunch was
taken under trees at the restaurant near the office and apparently owned by the mother
of our electrician. Manos was now also feeling delicate and arriving at the restaurant announced
to the owner in a stage whisper I have diarrhoea what do you recommend. I'm certain that in
England the same request would have been met with something like I recommend you eat somewhere
else. Thankfully we were the first customers and the owner brought a plate of two fried
eggs for Manos before serving large helpings of mixed mesedas to the three of us. I drank
a soft drink resisting the recommended social drinking while Manos fortified by the eggs
ate at least half the mesedas and drank a couple of cold beers. We chatted for an hour
or two until I said I felt I needed a rest so we returned to the house. Manos I hope
went back to the office to lie down as well. Sunday morning was spent agreeing the outstanding
list of works to be completed with Manos. The main items that were obstructing this
was the hatch and the metal hatch covers on the ground floor. Manos is also in creative
mood this morning. What about a folding bed attached to the metalwork? It would give you
much more flexibility upstairs. I know somewhere in town that can have strong mattresses made
up to any size. It's not expensive I would give you directions. In the bathroom he proposed
using the metal upright as a spine for some small shelving that would make you for useful
storage. Up on the roof we discussed the necessity for shade. We brought a large white triangular
canvas cell from England. We asked if anything could be done with this. We stretched it out.
It would need some uprights to suspend it from. Leave it with me I'll see what can be done.
The problems with the hatches, the roof one and the ground floor hatches, had kept downstairs
as a building site. In this state, even though we'd taken measurements, there had been limited
opportunity to make decisions about any permanent arrangements for the kitchen and seating which
we knew we needed. The hope had been that we would camp in the house and give ourselves
an idea of how much or how little space there was and how we should split it up. As a compromise
we suggested to Manos that if his carpenter could make us a simple bench work surface
housing a sink, the taps could be fitted to the wall. Then we could use it as a temporary
kitchen until we felt we understood the space in the house for us to make some decisions
on more permanent arrangements. This was readily agreed to, even suggested some storage below
the work surface. We agreed to meet again before we left midweek and we adjourned to
a new restaurant that was quickly becoming our favourite. We took a long lunch again
on the first floor terrace in the restaurant, created inside an old carob factory. The
rub seemed to be a wonder crop, used as a chocolate substitute, as cattle fodder and
as some mysterious ingredient in the photographic film production. The building has been beautifully
restored with carefully selected fittings set against stone walls, lots of glass and
pastel coloured furniture. I noticed that there were no pictures hung on the walls and
cheekily asked the owner if they would be interested in some framed prints, the product
of a recent spell at a print department in our local college at home. The answer was
typically cretin, why not, bring them in with you next time and we'll look at them. The
following day we returned and ordered some wine. I showed the pictures to the owner who
was complimentary but said he thought he would leave the walls clear for the time being.
He must have sensed my disappointment as he quickly asked me to bring the pictures with
me. We're going next door where we have a shop. We left the restaurant and just next
door down a couple of steps was a small shop and as my eyes adapted to the contrast between
the bright sun outside and the comparatively subdued lighting within, I saw a smiling dark
haired lady sitting behind a carved polished wood desk. This is my mother. We exchanged
handshakes. Jeff has some pictures for us to sell. Where shall we put them? The shop
comprised two smallish rooms with stone walls and a cool tiled floor with sets of shelves
and small tables on every wall. The stock was a mixture of beautifully coloured glass,
racks of wine and local rackie, carved olive wood ornaments and kitchenware as well as
pretty coloured metal jugs used in restaurants or house wine. So near the start of the season
it seemed very well stocked with little space for all five framed prints, each one some
two foot by 18 inches. Dimitri was undeterred and started handing items off the shelves
to me. Once my arms were full I had to start putting stuff down on some of the other shelves.
After several reshuffles and reducing some of the space in between items we were left
with a bare shelf, lit with spotlumps in a prime position facing the door. We'll put
them here he said decisively. I hoped his mother approved, after all it was her shop.
I needn't have worried as she was smiling serenely and turned to attend to a customer
who was making what appeared to be an impulse purchase of a large coloured glass piece for
the princy sum of 300 euros. Perhaps bringing the princy would be a good move, then I remembered
we had yet to discuss any commercial arrangements.
Are you happy with the pictures here Jeff? Yes they look good, let's hope they will
sell I answered. What are your normal arrangements for pricing with suppliers? We quickly agreed
on a simple arrangement, a 50-50 profit split and a euros retail price per frame print
with Dimitri at my suggestion having the option of discounting the price later in the season
if they were unsold. As I folded up the large zip bag I brought them in and my pack of greeting
cards with local photos fell out. What are these? You do cards too? Yes, would you like
some of these as well? Why not? he said positively. Let's go, your wine will be getting warm.
I returned to the restaurant terrace where my wife was enjoying the sun, the view and
the wine. You'd be gone ages, will they take any? Smiling I was able to report that
all five were on display in the shop next door together with the cards. On the strength
of future revenue we ordered lunch and another carafe of wine, well why not? At home. We
were away staying with friends in Wales towards the end of June when the next update arrived,
just a photo of the spiral staircase and the hatch with the caption, Glass for the hatch
has been located. This is good news as there will be much discussion about whether it will
be one panel of glass or nine, plate glass or glass bricks or even in a fit of frustration
wood. Dear Geoff, I hope you had a pleasant weekend. The Glass for the hatch has been
located. This week the Ironman, Glassman, Electrician and me all go together to see
how it's working and what is needed. I thought that would be a site meeting I would be happy
to miss. Earlier in the process we've detected some fairly undisguised tensions between Manos
and the Metalman and there have been some uncomplimentary comments about the Glassman.
At one point Manos had told me that the Tileman thought they were all making too much fuss.
Frustrated by the delay I suggested, only half in jest, that the Tileman should be immediately
commissioned to install a hatch of his own design, tiled or otherwise. I left my call
to Manos until the end of the week and on the Friday morning had one of our usual styles
of conversations. It could not be described as being at total cross purposes nor it could
be thought of as entirely in tune. I opened the skirmish by asking whether the hatch meeting
had concluded satisfactorily. He gave a guarded yes. I then asked him whether it had leaked
at all and asked if he was satisfied with the seal. Ah yes, it was fine for the hose
pipe but here the winter rains would be unlike rain you've ever seen. Okay, so we just hope
it will be okay then. But as far as it goes the house is now sealed and weather tight.
He then changed tack. So tell me when are you coming back again? Well as we said, when
the house is finished and we can stay in it, let us know when that will be and then I can
book flights. His reply was that we should tell him when we would be coming and the house
would be finished by that date. I gave up and said we would talk about it here and contact
him shortly, probably the next day. The next day after booking flights for the end of July
we called the office and relayed the dates, also agreeing a few details to be finished.
Unfortunately this visit did not take place following a dramatic turn of events. Since
the last visit in June I had suffered from painful headaches. Visits to our doctor and
two subsequent trips to two casualty wards had only resulted in suggestions of migraines.
After a rapid deterioration and a very frightening 24 hours of the kind support of our friends
Dallara Martin, I was to wake up in an intensive care unit in a neurological centre of the
Sussex hospital. A surgical team had been called in and I had undergone an emergency
and life savouring operation. Delayed completion of the holiday home seemed an incidental matter.
Once the haematoma was drained and following several days monitoring and a second brain
scan I was released home for recuperation with stern instructions to take it very easy,
no driving or flying for the immediate future. It appeared that the split second slip back
in June had resulted in a very close call. After my dramatic hospital visit the need
to recuperate pushed the thoughts of the house project from my mind but there was a need
to tell Monos that the planned visit in August would not be taking place.
The latest emails had been some questions of detail that I had picked up while in hospital
so these were briefly answered with an accompanying promise to call him in a few days without
revealing the reason for this. I had been told to avoid any further drama and excitement
and we concluded that conversations about the house, particularly with Monos, usually
involved a measure of both of these. An update arrived via the photo website with some welcome
progress. The floor tiles on the ground floor had been relayed which must mean the floor
hatches had been reinstalled, new stone inserts had been cut and fitted to the side of the
stair treads and we could see that the air conditioning unit had been installed, placed
neatly high up in the stairwell next to the spiral stairs. Stephanie rang the office and
broke the news to Helen and asked her when would be a good time to speak to Monos, knowing
he would be upset. An hour later, breathless and very concerned, Monos was ringing us.
It is dreadful, how is Geoff? Will he be alright? I am so upset. Eventually she asked if he
would like to talk to me. A plaintiff Monos weakly inquired, can he speak? We talked and
I reassured him that the surgeon said there was no reason I should not make a full recovery
as long as I took a period of taking things easy. In practical terms this meant postponing
our planned visit for the following week. The house is almost ready, I will send you
photos but are you sure that you will be okay? It is so tragic. We broke the news of our
abandoned trip to move into the house but emphasised that we would travel as soon as
I received the all clear to. Conversation moved on to details of completed works and
outstanding tasks. I felt an information overload and perceptively Monos must have sensed this
as he said that it would be best to look at the photos and call with any questions or
instructions. Exchanging best wishes we ended the call. He was as good as his word and later
the same day some more photos arrived showing that the fridge had been installed. There
was also photos of a new doorbell, an outside light above the front door and down lighters
in one of the warm niches. Early evening I called Monos again to thank him for the photos
and check he was over the shock of my news. He sounded more composed but also promised
to take some more photos that evening to show the lights on in the house. Again he wished
me a speedy recovery and we look forward to receiving this further update even though
there was a growing sense of frustration at not being able to stay in the completed house.
When we were able to look at the photos the next day we were truly delighted by them.
The outside lights washed down the stones at the front of the house highlighting the
contours and bringing out the honey coloured tones of the stones. The lights inside shone
out through the open windows with the grey painted shutters and frames contrasting with
the colour of the stones. The photos of the interior were equally rewarding. The same
coloured stones with the wide light pointing between them looked wonderful with the warm
browns and yellows relieved by some light greys. We'd chosen some coloured light shades
to use as four pendant lights to hang from the old wooden beams upstairs. These contrasted
nicely with the sharper light of the down lighters and niche lights but their harshness
was already tempered by the variety of colours in the stone and the walls. Manos has also
prepared a small surprise for us by way of a ribbon of LED lights forming an L shape
along the two walls. We'd agreed with Manos to leave a gap between the walls and the floorboards
on the first floor. He'd eloquently described the floor as floating with the light washing
up and down the stone walls through a small gap. The LED lights magnify this effect and
look very dramatic in the photos. There was also a practical aspect to the floating floor
meaning that the edge could be straight even though the wall surface around it was uneven.
Another photo showed some expensive looking black box with a blue light on it. It also
stated uninterruptible power supply for the electric hatch mechanism. Very high tech but
perhaps essential if we didn't want to get stranded on the roof terrace. There was also
pictures of the stairs with the light from the bathrooms shining through the frosted
glass stair backs illuminating the stairs very theatrically. The whole look was now closer to
our imagination. A blend of traditional and modern with interesting little design surprises.
The final addition was the kitchen unit that the carpenter had made. There'd be much discussion
about the kitchen throughout the project but as the building details were finalised and we began
to see more Cretan houses and think about Cretan recipes the options widened rather than narrowed.
We concluded that we wanted to live in the house before finalising the kitchen
so to ask Manos if a simple temporary kitchen bench could be made.
This had a simple sink inset, space for a free-standing hob and food preparation. The
taps could be fixed to the wall and some storage made on a shelf below the work surface.
The phone rang early at home one morning. Good morning, is it too early? I'm up at your house
and I'm wondering about the plant from outside. What do you think? A bougainvillea, a vine or a
jasmine? Well it must be nearly finished if he's thinking about planting shrubs. After a brief
discussion we settled on a jasmine. It would be more fragrant than a vine and less prickly on the
stem than a bougainvillea. Once more we expressed our gratitude and said how pleased we'd been with
the whole look of the house in the recent night pictures that we'd seen. He agreed that the
lighting seemed to have enlarged the building both inside and out and after he'd gone we realised that
today was the day we would have flown out again but had to be cancelled because of my operation.
No matter, the house would still be there for later visits. The next contact from Manos was an
online conversation one evening early in August. After asking about my post-op recovery plan,
he told us that jasmine had been planted and was some two metres tall. We exchanged other text
comments and then it became quite lyrical. I've just finished a large project but it's not been
as creative as your house. Your house is small but enlarged, unique and intelligent. I have enjoyed
the project and working with you. This is good to hear because the three of us knew that the whole
project had not been without its frustrations for all of us but if we got to this point in all fairness
and we got to this point and all felt so positive at the end of it then it would be a good thing.
He concluded by saying he would send a photo of the climbing jasmine and pictures of the inside
after cleaning and we would wish each other a good weekend. As promised a new set of pictures
arrived with the first one showing the jasmine planted to the left of the front door and climbing
three quarters of the way to the top of the door. Other photos were of the staircase after they'd
been cleaned as well as the new floorboards upstairs. There are also more images of the
detail in the wet room with its shock tiling which was still taking a little getting used to.
The glass in the windows and the floor pan looked clean as did the large mirror entirely covering
the back of the bathroom door. Areas of tiling that needed finishing when we were last there
in the early summer were now finished. We noticed details such as door handles and window
shutter latches. This has really felt like finishing touches and I couldn't wait to
get out there to see it all and at long last stay in the house.